HARI SREENIVASAN: Tonight, we
begin a look back, over the
next few weeks, at the unrest
that hit cities across
America in the summer of 1967.
Detroit particularly captured
the nation's attention.
Fifty years later,
special correspondent
Soledad O'Brien reports
on what sparked it all and
the scars that remain today.
MAN: On July 23, 1967,
Detroit was hit by a riot.
LORETTA HOLMES, Detroit:
Everything broke loose.
MAN: Forty-three dead, thousands
injured, and the city in flames.
WOMAN: All we could hear is
fire engines and police sirens.
JAMES CRAIG, Detroit Police
Chief: I guess, when I'm being
politically correct, I will
say unrest.
It's a riot.
It's a straight-out riot.
MAN: It was just pure rage.
WOMAN: Detroit had been what
some people thought was a model
city, a place where blacks and
whites had found a
way to get along.
MAN: There was a lot of
enmity and anger between
the young black guys and
the young white police
officers.
I think we locked up
about 7,000 people total.
WOMAN: A lot of people hollering
and screaming and saying, why
do you keep messing with us
and not go to your
neighborhoods?
WOMAN: There were more
than 2,500 buildings
that were destroyed,
looted or burned to the
ground, over 1,200 injured.
MAN: A rebellion.
WOMAN: Insurrection.
MAN: The white community
was calling it a riot.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Detroit
1967, a riot or rebellion?
To this day, they still
debate what it was.
DAN MCKANE, Former Detroit
Police Officer: A lot of the
smoke was on 12th Street, which
is what it was called then.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: The
disturbances began on
12th Street, since renamed
Rosa Parks Boulevard.
They started spontaneously
after a routine police raid on
an illegal bar or what locals
called a blind pig.
Dan McKane was a young
street cop in Detroit's
tactical mobile unit.
DAN MCKANE: Each precinct had
a vice crew, and they would
arrest the proprietors, and
then probably write tickets
to the rest of the guys.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: How would
you have described the Detroit
Police Department back in 1967?
DAN MCKANE: Well, it
was majority white male.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Tensions
between the police and
the African-American
community appeared
to have reached their limit.
LORETTA HOLMES:
It came to a boil.
People were just tired
of being hassled.
They was tired of them coming
into their neighborhoods.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Loretta Holmes
was in that blind pig that
night, to welcome back soldiers
coming home from Vietnam.
Suddenly, police burst in.
LORETTA HOLMES: And then
I saw a sledgehammer
come through the door.
Next thing we know, the
police were in there.
They took us downstairs.
About four -- I would say three
or four paddy wagons parked.
And oh, my God, it was a
million people out there.
It's like somebody got on
the bullhorn and said, come
to 12th and Clairmount.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: The angry
crowd outside exploded into
five days of full-out violence.
"LIFE" magazine captured
15-year-old Frank
Robinson playing in the
rubble that was left
of 12th Street.
FRANK ROBINSON, Detroit: They
threw a couple bricks through
windows, and the police didn't
come.
People saw an opportunity.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: And the
opportunity was to do what?
FRANK ROBINSON: To loot.
It may have turned into a
racial situation later, but
from the beginning, it was just
people seeing an
opportunity to loot.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Detroit's
violent unrest was the largest
in the U.S. in about 100 years.
Violence had also
erupted earlier in
Newark and Los Angeles.
Quickly, President Lyndon
Johnson named a commission
to explore the causes.
Named for its chair, Illinois
Governor Otto Kerner, the Kerner
Commission's only surviving
member is former Oklahoma
Senator Fred Harris.
FRED HARRIS, Former Oklahoma
Senator: What we said was, we
can describe with particularity
the conditions that
exist in the places where
these riots occur, almost
criminally inferior
schools, no jobs, housing
really terrible, and we have
to get at these kinds of basic
problems.
And that's certainly true again.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: What was
the biggest finding of the
Kerner Commission report?
FRED HARRIS: Our nation is
moving towards two societies,
one white, one black, separate
and unequal.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: The report
was rejected by the president.
None of its recommendations
were ever adopted.
SHEILA COCKREL, Former Detroit
City Councilwoman: The fact that
it never went anywhere, that
it really didn't drive the
level of policy and drive the
level of people dealing with
race, is a testament to
how deep-seated and how
tough it is to not only
have the conversations,
but to make the change
that would be required.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Sheila Cockrel,
who served on the Detroit
City Council for 15 years,
says white flight already
plaguing Detroit escalated
rapidly after the unrest.
Other forces were at play.
The auto industry was
hit by an oil crisis
and foreign competition.
There were two decades
of government corruption.
In 2008 the global
financial crash hit
Detroit particularly hard.
And, then, in 2013, Detroit
became the largest municipality
ever to file for bankruptcy.
Today, Detroit police are
adamant that they are trying to
repair their relationship with
the public.
They have trained police
officers in all 12 precincts to
build stronger community ties.
Officer Donald Parker.
How do you build trust
in a neighborhood?
DONALD PARKER, Detroit Police
Department: Building now is us
filtering into the community,
saying hi to Ms. Jones,
and saying, hey, we're
here, we're here, we're
touchable, we're reachable,
to let them know not
to be afraid of us.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: The composition
of the force has also changed.
In 1967, it was 5
percent African-American.
Today, it is about 65 percent
African-American, including
the chief, James Craig.
JAMES CRAIG: Well, what happened
50 years ago, I can't say
would never happen in Detroit,
because there's still issues.
We have one of the highest
poverty rates, and while we have
an above-average relationship
with the community, there's
the issue of opportunities.
And while that's getting better
and while the city has made
a major turnaround, there's
still this belief that, while
the turnaround is happening
in certain parts of the city,
it's not in others.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: A sign of
the work remaining to be done:
Detroit's poverty rate is double
what it was in 1967.
The city struggles with
segregation, inadequate
housing and has the
lowest school test scores
and graduation
rates in the nation.
Anika Goss-Foster is with Future
City Detroit, which imagines
modern-day uses for blighted
properties.
Goss-Foster's focus
is the next 50 years.
ANIKA GOSS-FOSTER, Detroit
Future City: We call
them dinosaurs, where
there are old monster
plants that are now sitting
vacant in the middle of
residential neighborhoods.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: The old Packard
plant, a dinosaur, abandoned
since the 1990s, is being
developed into the shops
and galleries in hopes of
reviving the neighborhood.
ANIKA GOSS-FOSTER: Things aren't
happening the way as quickly
as they want it to happen.
And they certainly aren't
happening at a rate
where it should happen.
But if you really pushed,
there are a lot of good things
happening all over the city.
There are parks that are
being taken care of that have
never been taken care of bore.
The city is completely lit.
People are much more involved
in their neighborhoods
than they have ever been.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN:
Entrepreneurs and business
leaders have transformed
7.2 miles of downtown
into a booming neighborhood that
has attracted tourists, tech
start-ups and new businesses.
But the boom hasn't yet trickled
down into the neighborhoods
that Goss-Foster is trying
to develop.
ANIKA GOSS-FOSTER: I think
that there are a lot of black
people that would say they
do feel left out.
I wouldn't say that
they feel ignored.
I think they feel like,
when is it my turn?
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Right,
to get investment.
ANIKA GOSS-FOSTER: To
get the same kind of
attention and investment.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Neglect felt
firsthand by Loretta Holmes.
LORETTA HOLMES: We
don't have anything.
There's nothing there anymore.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: So, what
happened to the neighborhoods?
LORETTA HOLMES:
People moved out.
They left.
They walked away.
No kept the property up.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Loretta
Holmes stayed behind.
LORETTA HOLMES: We
were in Central.
We were totally a community.
We were a community.
This is what we did.
We took care of each other.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: She mentors
students at her alma mater,
Detroit's Central High.
LORETTA HOLMES: We
give scholarships.
We go ahead and we will buy the
jerseys for the football team.
Kids that doesn't have a
coat, we do it undercover,
because we don't want
the other kids to know.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Her investment
in kids is what gives her
hope for a better future for
Detroit.
Is the city of Detroit
better off today than it was?
LORETTA HOLMES: Heck no.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: In the '60s?
LORETTA HOLMES: No.
No.
No, because it's...
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Better
off than five years ago?
LORETTA HOLMES:
Than five years ago?
Yes, because now I
can see the change.
I really can.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Change that,
for a city with a history of
racial conflict and struggle,
is long overdue.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Soledad O'Brien in Detroit.